A RT| C L F | ® Check for updates |

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25923-7 OPEN

Magnetopause ripples going against the flow form
azimuthally stationary surface waves

M. O. Archer® '™ M. D. Hartinger?, F. Plaschke® °, D. J. Southwood! & L. Rastaetter*

Surface waves process the turbulent disturbances which drive dynamics in many space,
astrophysical and laboratory plasma systems, with the outer boundary of Earth's magnetosphere, the magnetopause, providing an accessible environment to study them. Like waves
on water, magnetopause surface waves are thought to travel in the direction of the driving
solar wind, hence a paradigm in global magnetospheric dynamics of tailward propagation has
been well-established. Here we show through multi-spacecraft observations, global simulations, and analytic theory that the lowest-frequency impulsively-excited magnetopause surface waves, with standing structure along the terrestrial magnetic field, propagate against the
flow outside the boundary. Across a wide local time range (09-15h) the waves’ Poynting flux
exactly balances the flow’s advective effect, leading to no net energy flux and thus stationary
structure across the field also. Further down the equatorial flanks, however, advection
dominates hence the waves travel downtail, seeding fluctuations at the resonant frequency
which subsequently grow in amplitude via the Kelvin-Helmholtz instability and couple to
magnetospheric body waves. This global response, contrary to the accepted paradigm, has
implications on radiation belt, ionospheric, and auroral dynamics and potential applications to

other dynamical systems.

"Space and Atmospheric Physics Group, Department of Physics, Imperial College London, London, UK. 2 Space Science Institute, Boulder, CO, USA. > Space
Research Institute, Austrian Academy of Sciences, Graz, Austria. 4 NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, MD, USA.
email: m.archer1O@imperial.ac.uk

NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | (2021)12:5697 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25923-7 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications 1
ARTICLE

harp discontinuities separating regions with different phy
sical parameters are a key feature of space, astrophysical and

laboratory plasmas. Their dynamics about pressurebalanced equilibrium, magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) surface
waves, act as an efficient mechanism of filtering, accumulating
and guiding the turbulent disturbances omnipresent between/
through their respective systems. Surface waves have been
observed and modelled within tokamak experiments!, plasma tori
surrounding planets*, the solar atmosphere (e.g. in coronal
loops>), the heliopause*, accretion disks? and astrophysical/relativistic jets° to name a few. This makes understanding surface
waves of universal importance.

While many of these environments can only be remote sensed,
planetary magnetospheres (particularly that of Earth) provide the
opportunity for in situ measurements of surface wave processes.
The motion of the outer boundary of a magnetosphere, the
magnetopause, is of primary importance in dictating global
magnetospheric dynamics since it controls the flow of mass,
energy and momentum from the solar wind into the terrestrial
system having direct and indirect space weather impacts on the
radiation belts, auroral oval and ionosphere’~?. Surface waves on
a planetary magnetopause, which occupy the lower ends of the
so-called ultra-low-frequency range (ULF; fractions of milliHertz
to a few Hertz), are excited either by pressure imbalances (typically on the dayside) or flow shears (on the flanks)!9.!!. Magnetopause surface waves are thus similar to surface waves on bodies
of water, which form due to and travel in the direction of the
wind!2!>, Since magnetopause surface waves impart momentum
on the magnetosphere, the antisunward flow of the external
driver—the shocked solar wind—has led to a well-accepted
paradigm of the tailward propagation of outer magnetospheric
ULF waves at all local times!4-!”. Surface waves may subsequently become non-linear via the Kelvin-Helmholtz instability
at the magnetotail (when sufficient free energy is present to
overcome magnetic tension or plasma compressibility) forming
vortices that undergo magnetic reconnection, transporting mass
across the boundary!®!?. The paradigm of tailward propagation
in magnetospheric dynamics is thought to hold even in response
to the rather common impulsive events that drive intense space
weather”, for example, large-scale solar wind pressure pulses and
shock waves?!) or smaller (Rg scale or less) kinetically generated
bow shock phenomena like magnetosheath jets*>. The models
predict an exception, in agreement with several observations, only
at the early post-noon magnetopause, since pressure fronts
aligned with the Parker spiral interplanetary magnetic field (IMF)
strike this region before the pre-noon sector. Reported instances
of sunward propagating ULF waves have been attributed to
internal processes, such as energetic particle instabilities** or
changes in the magnetotail configuration??®.

In physics, a common approach to understanding a dynamical
system is to determine its normal modes. These form in a magnetosphere when system-scale MHD waves become trapped
through reflection by boundaries or turning points. Transverse
Alfvén waves, propagating along field lines due to magnetic
tension forces, are reflected by the highly conductive ionosphere
resulting in standing waves akin to those on a guitar string”’. Fast
magnetosonic waves, driven by correlated thermal and magnetic
pressure gradients, trapped radially form so-called cavity/waveguide modes*®?, somewhat similar to the resonances of wind
instruments. These magnetospheric normal modes due to MHD
body waves have been well-studied and tend to conform to the
aforementioned paradigm!*-!”, However, it had long been proposed that magnetopause surface waves propagating along the
terrestrial magnetic field in response to impulsive pressure variations might too reflect at the northern and southern ionospheres, forming a magnetopause surface eigenmode (MSE)

NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25923-7

somewhat analogous to the vibrations of a drum’s membrane””.

The theory of these standing waves has been developed using
ideal incompressible MHD in box model magnetospheres*!.
Despite their simplicity, these models have been able to reproduce
many features captured by more advanced global MHD
simulations**. For example, MSE frequencies near the subsolar
magnetopause can be approximated in the limit kg <<k, as (Eq.

(6) of ref. °°, using pressure balance at the magnetopause)

~ Boh
a/ HoP msh
a k 2 Psw Vow (2)

Pmsh

for angular frequency w, wavenumber k, magnetic field strength
B, mass density p and speed v with subscripts sw, msh and sph
corresponding to the solar wind, magnetosheath and magnetosphere, respectively. MSE thus constitute the lowest-frequency
normal mode of the magnetospheric system, given the smaller
phase speeds and wavenumbers than other modes. Indeed, Eq. (2)
yields fundamental frequencies below 2 mHz and thus evanescent
scales that highly penetrate the dayside magnetosphere**”?.
However, MSE is thought to be strongly damped due to the finite
thickness of the boundary, perhaps persisting for only a few wave
periods*®>4>4, Direct evidence of MSE was discovered only
recently°°, likely due to the observational challenges in unambiguously demonstrating such a low-frequency normal mode has
been excited. Fortuitous multi-spacecraft observations of the
response to an isolated, broadband magnetosheath jet revealed
narrowband magnetopause oscillations and magnetospheric ULF
waves that were in excellent agreement with the theoretical predictions of MSE and could not be explained by other known
mechanisms. These observations in the mid-late morning sector
strikingly showed no azimuthal motion of the boundary despite
the expectation that surface waves be advected tailward!9,
hinting that this eigenmode may challenge the usual paradigm. It
is currently unclear how to reconcile this with current models,
especially since (unlike meridionally) there is no boundary azimuthally for surface waves to reflect against to reverse course.

In this paper, we address this conundrum by considering
surface waves’ energy flux through spacecraft observations, global
MHD simulations, and analytic MHD theory in order to explain
the resonant response of the magnetospheric system globally. We
show that magnetopause surface waves propagate against the flow
forming an azimuthally stationary wave across a wide local
time range.

Results

Spacecraft observations. We use Time History of Events and
Macroscale Interactions during Substorms (THEMIS)°° spacecraft observations from satellites A-E (THA-THE) during the
previously reported event of MSE triggered by a magnetosheath
jet on August 7, 2007. See the spacecraft observations section of
‘Methods’ for further details of instruments and techniques
employed. The spacecraft were located at ~09:30 MLT (magnetic
local time) in a string-of-pearls formation. For context, at 22:25
UT an isolated ~100s magnetosheath jet occurred upstream of
the magnetopause which was followed by a period of ~18 min
with little pressure variations (demarked by vertical dotted lines)
until another jet occurred at 22:45 UT (Fig. 2d of ref. °°). The
magnetopause moved in response to the jet, undergoing two
boundary oscillations at 1.8 mHz corresponding to the fundamental mode MSE (Figs. 2g and 3b of ref. °°). Figure 1 shows
magnetospheric observations by the THA (panels a-i) and THE
(panels j-r) spacecraft of the magnetic (panels a, j), velocity

2 NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | (2021)12:5697 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25923-7 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25923-7

THA observations [6.1,-5.3,-1.4] R. GSM

22 20 22 25 22 30 22 35 22 40 22 45

2007 Aug 07 (219) hour min (UT)

-200
22 50 22 20

ARTICLE

THE observations [8.1,-5.3,-2.1] R. GSM

>
5,
aa)
%&

filtered

22 25 22 30 22 35 22 40

2007 Aug 07 (219) hour min (UT)

22 45 22 50

Fig. 1 THEMIS spacecraft time-series observations in the magnetosphere. Shown for THA (a-i) and THE (j-r). From top to bottom the first set of panels
show perturbations in the magnetic (a, b, j, k), ion velocity (e, d, I, m) and electric (e, f, n, 0) fields. In these vertical pairs, top panels show the raw (thin)
and LOESS smoothed (thick) data, whereas the bottom panels show the latter once detrended. Subsequent panels depict the Poynting vector (g, p) and
energy density (h, q), showing instantaneous (thin) and time-averaged (thick) values. Finally, the energy velocity (i, r) is shown compared to the absolute
magnetosheath flow speed at THB (grey). Throughout, standard errors are indicated by shaded areas. Vertical dotted lines demark the times of little
upstream pressure variations following the isolated impulsive jet that triggered this event.

(panels c, 1) and electric fields (panels e, n). Dynamic spectra of
these using the continuous wavelet transform can also be found in
Supplementary Fig. 1 revealing the 1.8 mHz fundamental mode
MSE (clearest in the compressional magnetic field components at
both spacecraft) and 3.3 mHz second harmonic MSE (e.g., in the
perpendicular components of the magnetic field), as well as a
6.7 mHz fundamental toroidal standing Alfvén wave at THA
(azimuthal velocity/radial electric field)*°. THD _ spacecraft
observations proved similar to THE, and the other spacecraft
encountered the magnetosheath too often for use here. We aim to
measure the Poynting vector and corresponding energy velocity
associated with MSE, concepts which are further explained in

Poynting’s theorem for MHD waves section of ‘Methods’. This
necessitates extracting the associated wave perturbations from the
data, removing noise and other signals as described in the timebased filtering section of ‘Methods’, resulting in the filtered
magnetic (panels b, k), velocity (panels d, m) and electric fields
(panels f, 0) shown in Fig. 1. These are then used to determine
energy densities and fluxes. Between the two dotted lines (which
indicate the times of little upstream pressure variations), all
spacecraft observed time-averaged Poynting vectors with components consistently azimuthally eastward and a slight tendency
towards radially outwards too (panels g, p). This was also evident
at the MSE frequencies in the Poynting vectors computed using

NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | (2021)12:5697 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25923-7 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications 3
ARTICLE

Zasm = -2.1 Re

THA THB THC THD THE

Xggm (Re)

Fig. 2 Directions of the time-averaged Poynting vectors at each THEMIS
spacecraft location. These are displayed in the Zosj,= — 2.1R_ (a) and
Yosm = — 5.3 Re (b) planes. Coloured squares represent the THEMIS
spacecraft positions. Black arrows emanating from these indicate
normalised Poynting vectors. Grey arrows depict the magnetosheath flow
velocity direction. A representative geomagnetic field line (grey) and model
magnetopause location (black) are also shown.

the wavelet transforms (see Fourier and wavelet techniques of
‘Methods’ for details) which are shown in Supplementary Fig. 1 in
time-frequency and in Supplementary Fig. 2 as a function of
frequency by averaging over the interval. The average Poynting
directions at each spacecraft location are shown in Fig. 2, showing
excellent agreement across all spacecraft in the equatorial plane
(panel a). These observations show MSE do not conform to the
typical ULF wave paradigm of tailward propagation®*? (waveguide modes’ Poynting fluxes are directed tailward or have no
net azimuthal component?’-*’; Kelvin-Helmholtz generated
surface waves travel tailward and radiate energy into the
magnetosphere*94!), The wave energy density (Fig. lh, q) is
dominated by the magnetic component, though the kinetic
energy becomes comparable later in the interval. The waves’
azimuthal energy velocity (Fig. li, r) is comparable to the flow
speed in the magnetosheath (absolute value in grey) but oppositely directed, as indicated in Fig. 2a, suggesting the two forms of
opposing energy flux might balance one another out and result in
no net energy flow, ie. an azimuthally stationary wave. This
potentially may be behind the lack of azimuthal propagation in
the observed boundary motion during this interval’? and may
hold the key to how MSE are even possible away from the noon
meridian.

Since surface waves are formulated as collective magnetosonic
waves on both sides of the boundary, the component of the

NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25923-7

Poynting vector towards the magnetopause might be understood
in terms of the magnetosonic dispersion relation (Eq. (7) of
ref. 1°)

w*

k, = —ky — kj +- 2 )
wv +20 - Ik-v,| )

r

(3)

where vy is the Alfvén velocity and c, the speed of sound. Under
incompressibility, the last term is neglibigle resulting in a purely
imaginary k, and thus evanescence over similar scales to the length
of the geomagnetic field lines. We relax this assumption and use a
complex frequency w = we, — iy with damping rate y>0, since
surface waves on a boundary of finite thickness are thought to be
damped?". For the magnetospheric side, the phase of the last term
in Eq. (3) is negative (approximately twice that of w as the plasma
beta is small) and thus k? has a negative imaginary component.
This implies, for a physically reasonable solution with zero
amplitude at infinity, k, should have a small real component
pointed towards the magnetopause. We estimate that a damping
ratio y/Wm,. = 0.15 should result in radial phase velocity
components of ~10kms~! (and between 1 and 60kms~! for
y/@. = 0.02 — 19%), ie. considerably smaller than the Alfvén
speed of ~1000 kms~! and consistent with the average observed
radial energy velocities of 9-46 km s~!. This sense of propagation
is opposite to what is expected for a Kelvin-Helmholtz unstable
boundary, where the sign of y is reversed (being a growth rate)
and thus results in energy radiating into the magnetosphere. By
conservation of energy flux across the boundary, the Poynting
vector component towards the boundary would imply that
damped magnetopause surface waves lose some of their energy
to the magnetosheath. This energy pathway would be in addition
to the theorised irreversible conversion of surface wave energy to
the Alfvén continuum**.

THE and THD both observed significant field-aligned energy
flux also, seemingly less prominent at THA. One might naively
expect no field-aligned energy flux for a standing surface wave.
However, considering this is a dynamical mode involving
surface waves reflecting and interfering along the field under
asymmetric conditions and driving, a resultant flux in this
direction may be expected. For example, reflection at the
ionospheres is neither perfect nor is the absorption north-south
symmetric**. This will yield a superposition of standing and
propagating waves with a null point, shifted slightly from the
standing wave’s nodes/antinodes, either side of which some
resultant wave energy propagates to the respective ionospheres
where it is dissipated*>. The field-aligned flux at THE and THD
peaks approximately one MSE bounce time after the driving jet.
The corresponding energy velocity is consistent with the surface
wave phase speed (Eq. (1)). It, therefore, seems plausible that
these signatures are due to both the dipole tilt (Fig. 2b) resulting
in different reflectances in both hemispheres and the localised
driver exciting multiple harmonics with different relative
phases causing shifts in the interference pattern. To the first
point, the dipole tilt for this event was 17°, hence different
conductances in the northern and southern ionospheres would
be expected. Further, THA’s footpoint (66° geomagnetic
latitudes) could also have a different conductance to that
for THD and THE (71°, i.e. near/in the auroral oval)*4, which
could result in a difference in the proportion of wave energy
reflected back to the spacecrafts’ respective locations. To the
second point, the wavelet transform demonstrates differences in
the field-aligned Poynting fluxes for the two harmonics, most
clearly shown in Supplementary Fig. 2 where averaging over
time has been applied. The time-averaged Poynting flux at the
fundamental MSE frequency of 1.8mHz has a component in
the direction of the geomagnetic field at all spacecraft,

4 NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | (2021)12:5697 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25923-7 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25923-7

a Magnetopause normal displacement

Return to Half wave
equilibrium — period

+1 +1

+0.01
Emp (Re)

0 10 2 30 40 50 60
t (min)

b Power spectra of magnetopause perturbations
18

145

ine)
— — Ke)
ine) o>) oO
T

10 15
h)

MLT (

Secondary peaks

Normalised PSD

x1000 (Hz)

Simp

2 5
W/277 (mHz)

Azimuthal propagation of boundary perturbations 40

; 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20
MLT (h)

Fig. 3 Magnetopause motion in MHD simulation. a Normal displacement
with magnetic local time (MLT). b Spectra of the displacement normalised
by total power for each MLT (colour scale), with the root mean squared
(RMS) also given inset. Azimuthal slowness (¢) and effective wavenumber
(d) of filtered magnetopause perturbations for the raw data (lighter) as well
as after applying MLT smoothing (darker), with corresponding standard
errors shown in both cases as shaded areas.

ARTICLE

indicating the spacecraft were all located above this harmonic’s
null point. The direction of the Poynting vectors agreed to
within 26° and thus are consistent, taking noise into account.
However, at the second harmonic MSE of 3.3mHz, while
the Poynting vectors’ projections in the equatorial plane are
similar (to within 9°), along the field we find that THE/THD
observed southward fluxes, whereas at THA they were slightly
northward (though not statistically significant from noise). A
second harmonic wave has a node in displacement near the
equator, thus at this frequency, the spacecraft observations are
sensitive to which side of the null point they are located. In
addition, smaller wavelength surface waves are less penetrating
into the magnetosphere (Eq. (3)) which would weaken the
signal at THA’s location. We conclude that THA was very close
to the second harmonic MSE’s null point, whereas THE/THD
were slightly below it. Nonetheless, the main result of interest in
this paper, i.e. the fluxes radially and azimuthally, are in good
agreement across all spacecraft at both frequencies. MSE’s fieldaligned energy flux may have implications on energy deposition
in the ionosphere and warrants investigation in future work.

The above analysis was limited to a relatively short interval of
confirmed MSE activity following an isolated magnetosheath jet.
However, several other jets were also observed on this day and it
was noted that similarly directed Poynting vectors followed many
of them. We, therefore, take a wider interval and compute the
time-averaged Poynting vector as a function of frequency, as
detailed in the Fourier and wavelet techniques section of
‘Methods’. This was performed for THA as it was the only
spacecraft to experience uninterrupted magnetospheric observations. Supplementary Fig. 3 shows that at MSE frequencies
(dotted lines) the radial and azimuthal Poynting vector
components were statistically significant and in agreement with
the previous results, namely outward and eastward. The parallel
Poynting flux is positive at MSE frequencies indicating that THA
was overall located above the respective null points of these
waves“, We note that there is a reversal of the parallel Poynting
flux around the local Alfvén mode frequency (6.7 mHz) thus
unrelated to MSE. The typical tailward energy-flow paradigm
emerges only at much higher frequencies (>10 mHz).

Global MHD simulations. To further test our hypotheses from
the THEMIS observations, global MHD simulations of the global
magnetospheric response to a 1 min large-scale solar wind
density pulse are now employed (see Global MHD simulations in
‘Methods'). This reproduces a previous simulation**, where the
subsolar response could only be explained by MSE and not other
mechanisms. The normal displacement of the magnetopause in
the XY plane is shown in Fig. 3a. This highlights the dayside
magnetopause undergoes a strong compression when the pulse
arrives, rebounds returning to equilibrium (dashed line) but
overshoots, subsequently undergoing damped oscillations. Results
are identical on both flanks due to the symmetry of the system
and driver. The oscillations’ primary frequency is 1.4 mHz at all
local times (panel b), consistent with a fundamental MSE*. A
secondary peak in the spectra, not previously reported, grows
further downtail between 2.5 and 3.3 mHz. Both spectral peaks
are associated with the damped oscillations and not the broadband initial compression/rebound motions, as checked by a
wavelet transform. The secondary mode is likely due to (and at
the frequency which maximises) the Kelvin-Helmholtz instability, given the increasing flow shear across the boundary down the
flanks*°. Both modes become larger in amplitude (panel b and
inset) and persist longer (panel a) further downtail, though the
primary mode is always dominant. This suggests that MSE at

NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | (2021)12:5697 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25923-7 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications 5
ARTICLE

Sun-Earth Line (Y

ar

or
=
ep)
O

NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25923-7

Z ~<,, =0)

GSM —~“GSM

Magnetopause

(km s!)

OV

0 10. 20

40 50 60

t (min)

Fig. 4 Unfiltered perturbations in MHD simulation along the Sun-Earth line. Panel a shows motion of the bow shock (grey) and magnetopause (black)
about equilibrium. Subsequent panels show perturbations in the b radial velocity, ¢ azimuthal velocity and d compressional magnetic field components
(note the bi-symmetric log scale). Median absolute perturbations by distance are displayed to the right as the dark grey areas on a logarithmic scale. The

bow shock (light grey) and magnetopause (black) locations are also plotted.

1.4mHz, which originates on the dayside magnetopause, seeds
fluctuations that subsequently grow via Kelvin-Helmholtz in the
flanks despite not being at the instability’s peak growth frequency.

We now investigate the propagation of the 1.4mHz magnetopause oscillations, extracted as described in the time-based
filtering section of ‘Methods’. From Fig. 3a it appears that across
much of the dayside the waves do not propagate azimuthally (the
phase fronts are vertical), whereas it is clear in the flanks that
tailward propagating waves are present (inclined fronts, see also
Supplementary Movie 1). Here, we quantify this propagation via
the azimuthal slowness sg (reciprocal of apparent phase speed, see
slowness in 'Methods') since the slowness vector is always normal
to phase fronts*®. The results are shown in Fig. 3c. This reveals
that between ~09-15h MLT the slowness is zero and thus
the surface wave is apparently azimuthally stationary in this
region. Further down both flanks though, the usual tailward
motion is recovered. It may be instructive to express effective
local azimuthal wavenumbers mg = syWP np (¢), shown in panel
d (inp (@) is the magnetopause geocentric distance at each
azimuth). Care must be taken in interpreting these since the
magnetopause crosses L-shells and is not azimuthally symmetric,
so the dependence cannot be expressed simply as exp (im@)

everywhere. Instead, a superposition of wavenumbers will be
present, with my capturing the local azimuthal propagation of

the overall phase*’. gy is zero in the stationary wave region,

rises slowly to ~0.5 by the terminator, then more rapidly increases
to ~1 within a further 2h of LT. This global structure cannot be
attributed to the driver, since the intersection of the pressure
pulse with the magnetopause on arrival spans 08-16h MLT, ice.
larger than the stationary region.

We now look at the grid point data within the simulation.
Supplementary Movie 1 shows the compressional magnetic field
perturbations in the XY and XZ planes. Figure 4 shows boundary
(panel a), radial (b) and azimuthal (c) velocity, and compressional
magnetic field (d) perturbations along the Sun—Earth line These
demonstrate that the arrival of the pressure pulse and inward
magnetopause motion launches a compressional wave into the
dayside magnetosphere which reflects at/near the simulation’s
inner boundary and subsequently leaks into the magnetosheath
where it dissipates. This all happens within ~2 min (i.e. before
the magnetopause has finished rebounding) in agreement with
the magnetosonic speed profile. Such a short timescale provides
further evidence (in addition to that in ref. >*) that the subsequent
magnetopause oscillations on the dayside cannot be attributed to
cavity/waveguide modes as the lowest-frequency (quarter
wavelength*®) mode should be2=4mHz. Azimuthal velocities
are negligible, hence there is no evidence of toroidal Alfvén waves
in this region. The MSE signatures instead are radial
plasma motions and associated compressions/rarefactions of the

6 NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | (2021)12:5697 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25923-7 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25923-7

Terminator (X

0.2
ani
c o
2 19.2
102

_ 101

® 100

g )

~ -10°
>
“a {
-10
-107
20

7
65 10

>
5

10!

c 10°

Cc

— O

MO -10°
-10!

0 10 20

GSM —

ARTICLE

Z osm =9)

Magnetopause |55

-1
OV 5 (kms)

40 50 60

t (min)

Fig. 5 Unfiltered perturbations in MHD simulation along the equatorial terminator. Formatting is the same as Fig. 4. a shows the motion of the
magnetopause (black) about equilibrium. Subsequent panels show perturbations in the b radial velocity, ¢ azimuthal velocity and d compressional magnetic
field components (note the bi-symmetric log scale). Median absolute perturbations by distance are displayed to the right as the dark grey areas ona

logarithmic scale. The magnetopause (black) location is also plotted.

magnetic field, both of which decay in amplitude with distance
from the magnetopause as indicated by the median absolute
perturbations (grey areas in Fig. 4). The phase fronts, however,
are not purely evanescent and can be seen propagating towards
the magnetopause on the magnetospheric side. This occurs rather
slowly though at around 30-40kms~! near the boundary, in
agreement with the estimates due to damping made earlier.
Deeper into the magnetosphere more evanescent and _ less
propagating behaviour is found, as expected from Eq. (3) due
to the greater Alfvén speeds. The magnetic field perturbations on
either side of the boundary are in approximate antiphase with one
another throughout the dayside (note the magnetopause thickness in the simulation is ~1.5 Rpg, considerably larger than in
reality since gyroradius-scales are not resolved*?). There is
evidence of large-scale bow shock motion related to MSE, a
consequence that has not been considered before. At the subsolar
point (see Fig. 4) the bow shock lags the magnetopause motion by
~1 min, consistent with the fast magnetosonic travel time
through the magnetosheath, confirming that the resonance is
occurring at the magnetopause and subsequently driving the
shock oscillations. This lag occurs because magnetosheath plasma
is highly compressible?! 7°, thereby deviating from the evanescent
behaviour expected under incompressibility. Since both the
magnetopause and bow shock move asynchronously, the patterns
present in the subsolar magnetosheath are somewhat complicated. These could be explored further in the future.

In Supplementary Movie 1, magnetic field perturbations in the
equatorial plane are in phase across much of the dayside showing
little evidence of azimuthal propagation, confirming that ky is
much smaller than k, and k,. Tailward travelling disturbances can
be seen emanating from the oscillations near the dayside
magnetopause only at ~09 h and 15h MLT, hence are associated
with the propagating surface waves discussed earlier. Supplementary Movie 2 separates out these two regimes for further
clarity. Further down the flanks, at ~07 h and 17h MLT, structure
normal to the magnetopause emerges with strong peaks/
troughs ~2R; inwards from the boundary. Figure 5 shows cuts
along the terminator. This reveals, in addition to the surface
waves, the presence of a quarter wavelength waveguide mode*”*8
(at the magnetopause there is a dv, antinode and 6B, node; dB
exhibits nodal structure radially). The waveguide mode couples to
a toroidal Alfvén mode”? at Yoo, ~11.5 Rg (dvg antinode). These
two modes occur at the same ~ 10 min period as the surface
waves that originate at the subsolar point. Therefore, MSE can
couple to body eigenmodes in regions of the magnetosphere
where their frequencies sufficiently match (checked through timeof-flight estimates). Magnetospheric Alfvén speed profiles are
highly variable and significantly alter the eigenfrequencies of both
body modes?!, thus we expect that whether and where this
coupling may occur will vary substantially.

In the XZ plane, Supplementary Movie 1 reveals that the
~10 min period oscillations do not extend beyond the cusps

NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | (2021)12:5697 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25923-7 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications 7
ARTICLE

[8.0,-5.0,0.0] R. GSM

10
_ a Raw
a .
mM 6)
at)

E 8
— ©
m=
©
a se! C Raw
7 ————e a \\wW A a _
1
= -10 |
2
S10
"8
EQ
z=”
~ Ore ip Raw
E 10 / \ i=
Ss  -10 0.2
Filt
iE [\_ 7 EB
r fN — -_ as _
5E, SUI oo ES
Jv |
200 . 02 *
400 ee

S

i)
=
SZ 200f inst |
Ww E,|
> oF — — — — —
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 #450

Fig. 6 Virtual spacecraft observations within MHD simulation. Displayed
in a similar format to Fig. 1. From top to bottom the first set of panels show
perturbations in the magnetic (a, b), ion velocity (¢, d) and electric (e, f)
fields. In these vertical pairs, top panels show the raw data, whereas the
bottom panels show the filtered data. Subsequent panels depict the
Poynting vector (g) and energy density (h), showing instantaneous (thin)
and time-averaged (thick) values. Finally, the energy velocity (i) is shown
compared to the absolute magnetosheath flow speed (grey). Note the bisymmetric log scale on panels a, ¢, e.

into the northern and southern tail lobes. The waves are thus
confined to closed magnetic field lines, further backing the
surface eigenmode interpretation.

We finally study energy propagation throughout the simulation. Figure 6 shows results from a virtual spacecraft in the
magnetosphere close to the boundary at roughly the same
location as THE. Computing the Poynting vector as before (panel
g) shows it to be directed azimuthally towards the subsolar point
and slightly radially outwards, similarly to the observations. This
corresponds to an energy velocity (panel i) approximately equal
but opposite to the background magnetosheath flow speeds (grey)
at this local time, like in the observations.

Figure 7 shows equatorial maps of the time-averaged Poynting
(panel a) and advective (panel b) energy fluxes as well as the sum of
the two (panel c). Within the magnetosphere, the Poynting vectors
are directed azimuthally towards the subsolar point across the

NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25923-7

entire dayside, flipping direction at around the terminator to
recover the more usual tailward energy flux associated with
Kelvin-Helmholtz generated surface waves and waveguide
modes?’404!, Later within the simulation, however, this point of
reversal does slowly move slightly towards noon by ~1 h of MLT on
both flanks as the wave energy dissipates. A component directed
towards the magnetopause is also present across the dayside until
well into the flanks and the continuity of this energy flux into the
magnetosheath is apparent. The advective energy flux in Fig. 7b
consists predominantly of the tailward flow throughout the
magnetosheath. Therefore, the sum of the two clearly shows across
the dayside that energy fluxes tangential to the magnetopause are in
opposition to one another on either side. A small amount of energy
flows across the boundary from the magnetosphere into the
magnetosheath, which will then be swept downtail.

We, therefore, investigate the potential balance of tangential
energy fluxes on either side of the magnetopause in Fig. 8. At each
local time, we construct rays normal to the equilibrium
magnetopause and interpolate the time-averaged Poynting (panel
a) and advective (panel b) energy fluxes, taking the component
tangential to the boundary. Integrating these along the normal,
we arrive at panel c showing the total tangential energy flux
across both sides of the magnetopause. This demonstrates the
tailward energy flow due to advection (green) and opposing
Poynting flux (purple) across the dayside. Taking the sum of
these shows that they cancel out between 08:40 and 15:20 MLT,
i.e. the local time range for which the magnetopause oscillations
were found to be azimuthally stationary. This range is stable in
time for the duration of the oscillations. The results, therefore,
demonstrate that the stationary nature of MSE azimuthally is due
to a balance of the surface wave Poynting flux directed towards
the subsolar point opposing the tailward magnetosheath flow.
Outside of this region, however, even when the Poynting flux is in
opposition to the magnetosheath flow it is unable to overcome
advection and thus travelling surface waves result.

Analytic MHD theory. Finally, we look to incompressible
MHD theory (where k; + kj +k); =0 for surface waves!®31)

to understand this picture of the energy flow and
azimuthal propagation present within MSE. We consider a fundamental mode magnetopause surface wave of amplitude A
in displacement within a box model magnetosphere with
homogeneous half-spaces as depicted in Fig. 9a. The azimuthal
component of the Poynting vector at the equator on the magnetosphere side of the boundary for northward IMF is given by
(Eq. (15) of ref. 49)

eo Bo
S ) = A*ak I SP
( ,sph "ks 4 k; 2Uy

exp (—2|Sm(k,) | + — rnp]
(4)
with its equivalent on the magnetosheath side being Bo sh / Bo sph

times this and thus negligible. The wave energy densities are
(following Eqs. (11) and (13) of ref. 4°)

2 4
Bo sph A? ki

a
.
as)
=
NS
d
—
Ne
&
s
=
NS
|

4uy kg + kj
1 2e +h
(Umsh) io (ie msh ) — Posi A? F530 eX (—2/Sm(k,) | + rnp

Constructing the net energy velocity of the surface wave and

8 NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | (2021)12:5697 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25923-7 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25923-7

Poynting

Yesm (Re)

-10 “2

ARTICLE

Advective

t=25min
Eastward

Westward

7 6

log, [Energy Flux (W mi*)]

Fig. 7 Wave energy flux maps. Panels show time-averaged wave Poynting (a), advective (b) and total (¢) energy fluxes. Magnitude (colour) and direction
(arrows) are shown along with the equilibrium magnetopause (white dashed) and virtual spacecraft location from Fig. 6 (star).

simplifying using Eq. (1) gives

(Sy, ) + (Sinsh) + (Umsh)Vo.msh

VE.tot — °
(tsp + Unsh
kk Bo oh 1 Bo sph k7(2k2 + i
ORK Quy FT 4Po.msh dopo man ILO TS) YOmsh (7)
Bi ft oR (oa 2\)
Z i + w+ (2k; + ki)
ak ‘ 2k 7 ky :
Yo. msh g bey

ks + k 2(k; 4 kK)

By setting this to zero, ie. no net azimuthal energy flow, and
solving for real azimuthal wavenumbers yields the requirement

W
—2
!
This sets a limit on where it is possible for surface wave energy to
be trapped locally due to the speed of the adjacent magnetosheath. We can frame this limit purely in terms of solar wind
and magnetosheath conditions using Eq. (2) as

2V0 msh (9)

Yew (10)

According to gas-dynamic models of magnetosheath plasma
conditions’, this is satisfied for 08:40-15:20 h MLT, in excellent
agreement with the stationary region in the global MHD simulation. This extent should vary only slightly with solar wind
conditions (based on previous magnetosheath and MSE variability studies*>*), however, future work could test this.

Discussion

In this paper, we show that the recently discovered magnetopause
surface eigenmode (MSE), the lowest-frequency normal mode of
a magnetosphere, does not conform to the well-established
paradigm in global magnetospheric dynamics of tailward propagation. Multi-spacecraft observations, global MHD simulations
and analytic MHD theory are employed. Both the observations
and simulation show Poynting vectors in the magnetosphere
which point towards the subsolar point across the dayside,

contrary to current models of the magnetospheric response to
impulsive driving”. This energy flux thus opposes advection by
the magnetosheath and we find from the simulation that these
two cancel one another in the region 09-15 h magnetic local time,
resulting in an azimuthally stationary surface wave. Outside of
this region, however, the waves travel tailward. Considering
surface wave energy fluxes in a simple box model of the magnetosphere shows excellent agreement with the simulation on the
conditions required for a stationary wave to be possible. Our
conclusions are summarised in Fig. 9 within this box model.
When an impulsive solar wind transient arrives at the magnetopause, its broadband nature excites surface waves on the
boundary with a wide range of frequencies w and wavevectors k.
The boundary conditions at the northern and southern ionospheres quantise the possible values of k, largely determining a,
however, ky will be unconstrained as depicted in panel a. For
large magnetosheath flow speeds (panel b), none of the excited
wavevectors are able to compete with advection and the resultant
motion is tailward, in line with expectations. In the regime of
small magnetosheath flow speeds (panel c), however, there exists
an excited ky in opposition to the magnetosheath flow which is
able to exactly balance its advective effect. This leads to surface
wave energy being trapped locally as an azimuthally stationary
wave. All waves of other kg will be lost down the tail. This picture
not only explains the global propagation of magnetopause surface
waves but also how MSE on the dayside can seed fluctuations into
the magnetospheric flanks. The simulation shows that these
seeded waves which originate on the dayside subsequently grow
in amplitude via the Kelvin-Helmholtz instability, despite being
at a lower frequency to its intrinsic one, and may couple to cavity/
waveguide and Alfvén modes in regions of the magnetosphere
where their frequencies match. This reveals MSE’s effects are not
confined merely to the dayside (standing) region, instead having
global effects on the magnetosphere as its most fundamental
normal mode.

The cartoon highlights that, at each location on the boundary,
after the other (blue) wavevectors have been swept downtail and
the boundary has formed its resonance, the physics of the azimuthally stationary surface wave is confined to a small local time
region, i.e. a single meridian of geomagnetic field lines. While the
initial perturbation on the boundary and the corresponding
transient response will depend on the specifics of the driving

NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | (2021)12:5697 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25923-7 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications 9
ARTICLE

Tangential Energy Flux (4Wm~*)
-0.1 -0.05 0 0.05 0.1

+ Westward

Eastward ——>

msh

Normal distance (R_)

ash, |b Advective

cc"
DD ————<—$———— me 0 >
e
19
DO
xe)
-2 =
=
sph 1-3 9
-4
5
c Integrated
— Poynting |
=
= 5
=
5 8
LL Lu
>
>
©
ul 5
pe: Fa
£ D
© S
od)
cab)
E
5
6 8 10 12 14 16 18
MLT (h)

Fig. 8 Wave energy fluxes tangential to the magnetopause. Panels show
Poynting (a) and advective (b) energy fluxes tangential to the
magnetopause along magnetopause normals. Integrals along the normal
are shown in panel ¢ for the Poynting (purple) and advective (green) fluxes
along with their sum (black).

pressure variation (scale sizes, location of impact etc.), one can
simply decompose the initial perturbation at each local time into
the normal modes along the field (MSE) and this should entirely
dictate the subsequent resonant response at that local time.
Indeed, the local boundary motion and Poynting fluxes were in
agreement across both observations and simulations despite different scale size drivers being leveraged. The locality to the
physics means that the azimuthally stationary wave should
be limited to the local times in which the driver impacted the
magnetopause, hence the scale of the driver in azimuth (within
the 09-15h local time range) would be imprinted in the stationary waves excited.

NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25923-7

a Box Model Setup
N lonosphere Magnetopause

f

v =
£ g
2) n = L
o ae
2 S
= =
] b ts Impulsive &
Broadband
.

Pressure Pulse

b Large Magnetosheath Flow
(MLT < 09h or MLT > 15h)

<—

low advects surface wave energy

No k vector exists where surface wave energy
velocity can compete with magnetosheath flow

Tailward propagating surface waves
(Typical paradigm)

c Small Magnetosheath Flow
(09h < MLT < 15h)

k vector where surface wave energy velocity
is equal and opposite to magnetosheath flow

Azimuthally stationary surface waves
(Contrary to typical paradigm)

Fig. 9 Cartoon illustrating the results of this study. a shows the box
model magnetosphere, magnetosheath flow (white), and surface mode
wavevectors (dark blue) excited by the pressure pulse (orange).
Subsequent panels depict the resultant energy flow (lighter coloured
arrows) of the surface mode wavevectors for (b) large and (¢) small
magnetosheath flows.

These results raise the question why only tailward propagating
dynamics are reported in current models and observations of the
magnetospheric response to impulsive driving®. It is clear that
the models do not incorporate the possibility of surface wave
reflection due to bounding by the ionosphere, which is key to our
results, since while this was proposed long ago? it has only
recently been discovered**°. MSE constitute the lowest possible
frequency normal mode of the magnetospheric system and its
fundamental frequencies can often be fractions of milliHertz*?.

10 NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | (2021)12:5697 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25923-7 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25923-7

Such long-period narrowband waves are challenging to identify
observationally in general, either by orbiting spacecraft or
ground-based measurements, due to potential spatio-temporal
mixing*“ and the difficultly in distinguishing from turbulence/
noise>>°®. For these reasons global magnetospheric dynamics
and their associated ULF waves have often concentrated on the
continuous pulsation (Pc) bands above 2 mHz”’, which would
not typically incorporate the effects presented here. Furthermore, Fig. 9 shows that the majority of surface wave energy
excited by the driver does still propagate tailward, with only a
small amount being trapped locally that propagate against the
flow. Therefore, if further upstream driving by pressure variations occurs during these oscillations, the superposition of
waves present could easily mask the sunward Poynting vectors
associated with MSE thereby showing only a net tailward
energy flow. Future work is required in developing less
restrictive observational criteria for the detection of MSE in
general and to undertake statistical studies of MSE occurrence
to better understand how common this mode, and the results
presented on its energy flow, may be in reality to the variety of
impulsive drivers that impact on geospace.

The global waves associated with this normal mode of Earth’s
magnetosphere, possible due to the surface wave propagation
against the magnetosheath flow, will have important implications
upon radiation belt dynamics”®. The large-scale oscillations of
the magnetopause may cause the further shadowing of radiation
belt electrons than predicted simply by a pressure-balanced quasistatic response to the driver. Furthermore, MSE’s ULF wave
signatures present coherent and slowly varying perturbations in
compressional magnetic fields and azimuthal electric fields which
deeply penetrate across the entire dayside magnetosphere, which
may be ideal for the drift-resonant interaction and/or radial diffusion of radiation belt particles. However, current methods of
understanding these processes are suited only to the inner magnetosphere since they assume azimuthal symmetry, therefore,
more work is required in assessing the impact on the radiation
belts of this normal mode and asymmetric outer magnetospheric
waves in general. While the observations confirm significant
energy flow along the magnetic field towards the polar regions,
the wide region of stationarity from the simulations suggests weak
coupling of the surface waves to the Alfvén mode across the
dayside. This implies MSE have auroral, ionospheric, and ground
magnetometer signatures unlike other known ULF waves, with
these remaining poorly understood**?. In the flanks, however, it
seems likely that MSE-seeded waves could at times easily be
mistaken for intrinsic Kelvin-Helmholtz waves or waveguide
modes, despite the origin of the fluctuations on the dayside as
shown in the simulation. These factors may be why previous
ground-based searches, through widely used diagnostics for other
wave modes, called MSE’s existence into question?®°’. The work
thus highlights that care needs to be taken in understanding the
mechanisms which result in various dynamical modes in nearEarth space since they can all be intimately coupled.

Surface waves are known to be present at the other planetary
magnetospheres®.°!, which span a vast range of sizes, morphologies and plasma conditions®’. The surface eigenmode in principle should be a _ universal feature of boundaries in
magnetospheres*”, and thus the simple analytic theory presented
here (in the magnetospheric reference frame) may be instructive
in assessing where and in what frequency ranges these fundamental dynamics of the boundary may be prevalent at other
environments. The simple predictions could then be compared to
tailored global MHD simulations of these systems as well as
spacecraft observations.

Many other space and astrophysical systems too exhibit surface
waves where, like in the case of a magnetopause, substantial

ARTICLE

background flows may be present. A notable example is the
sausage and kink modes of coronal loops, which share many
conceptual similarities to the surface eigenmodes—they are
standing (though sometimes propagating) transverse oscillations
of the dense flux tubes in coronal active regions, anchored on
both ends by the chromosphere, excited by loop displacements
from coronal eruptions or shear flows in coronal plasma nonuniformities*°’. Asymmetric and/or inhomogeneous _ flows
around/along these structures affect surface wave evolution, with
important space weather consequences such as causing coronal
mass ejections to turn away from their original propagation
direction®*, though these effects are not typically incorporated
into models of coronal loop oscillations. Our results from in situ
observations at the magnetopause (not possible for the corona
and other space/astrophysical environments) challenge the
paradigm that surface waves necessarily propagate in the direction of the driving flow/pressure, as when discontinuities are
bounded the trapping of surface waves may occur in opposition
to advective effects, allowing these waves to form across broader
regions and to persist longer than would otherwise be expected.
The work may therefore have insights into the structure and
stability of these universal dynamical modes elsewhere.

Methods

Poynting’s theorem for MHD waves. Energy conservation for MHD wave perturbations (denoted by 6's with subscript 0’s representing equilibrium values)
involves the wave energy density

|SB|?

11
Duly (11)

1

(consisting of magnetic ug and kinetic ux contributions) and wave energy flux
given by the Poynting vector®°
OEx 6B
S=
Ho

where E is the electric field. Time-averaging and taking their ratio yields the socalled energy velocity

(12)

v="
E (u) )
equivalent to the group velocity for stable waves®°. In a moving medium, wave
energy advects with the background plasma, giving an additional flux uvp. These
principles are applied throughout.

(13)

Spacecraft observations. Observations in this paper are taken from the Time
History of Events and Macroscale Interactions during Substorms (THEMIS**;)
spacecraft taken during the previously reported interval of MSE%°. The five
spacecraft were close to the equilibrium magnetopause in a string-of-pearls formation. Data from the fluxgate magnetometer (FGM)°”, electrostatic analyser
(ESA)® and electric field (EFI)®? instruments are used. Note for the latter, we use
the E- B=0 approximation (valid over ULF timescales) for THD and THE to
replace the measured axial fields at each time, however, the instrument was not yet
deployed by THA so E= —v~x Bo is used, which was found to be reliable for the
other spacecraft. We note that THA plasma measurements were not available prior
to 22:08 UT. Magnetosheath intervals have been removed from THA, THD and
THE observations, identified when the electron density was greater than 5 cm~? or
the magnetic field strength was less than 45 nT. Vectors within the magnetosphere
have been rotated into local orthogonal field-aligned coordinates (r, ¢, ||). The fieldaligned direction (||) is given based on a robust linear regression of the magnetic
field vectors’®”!, with the azimuthal (¢) direction being the cross product of || with
the spacecraft’s geocentric position thus pointing eastward, and the radial (r)
direction completing the right-handed set directed away from the Earth. While this
coordinate rotation may result in some small E), these are negligible compared to
the other components and do not influence the results.

Global MHD simulations. We reproduce a high-resolution (; — Rg in the
regions considered in this paper, see Supplementary Fig. 4 for grid) Space Weather
Modeling Framework (SWMF’”?;) simulation run of MSE excited by a 1 min
solar wind density pulse (with sunward normal) under northward IMF°?. Full
details of the run are given in Supplementary Table 1. For all simulation quantities,
perturbations are defined as the difference to the linear trend before (t = 0 min)
and after (t = 60 min) the response to the pulse. Vectors are rotated into similar
local field-aligned coordinates. The magnetopause location is determined as the last

closed field line along geocentric rays through a bisection method accurate to

NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | (2021)12:5697 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25923-7 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications 11
ARTICLE

0.01 Rp. The bow shock standoff distance has been identified via interpolation as
the point where the density is half that in the solar wind. In displaying perturbations in the simulation, a bi-symmetric log transform” is often employed due to
the much larger amplitudes present during compression and rebound phases.

Time-based filtering. A time-based filtering technique is used to extract MSE
wave perturbations and suppress noise and higher/lower frequency signals. This
was chosen to avoid the potential influence of ringing artefacts or edge effects when
using frequency-based methods due to the nonstationary process. Nonetheless,
several different filtering methods were tested and the main results of the paper
remained robust.

In the method presented for the spacecraft observations, first the raw data are
smoothed using a 400 s robust LOESS method’?. For stationary processes, this has
a corresponding cutoff frequency of 3.6 mHz, therefore retains both the 1.8 mHz
fundamental and 3.3 mHz second harmonic MSE signals present>>. To remove any
lower frequency trends still present, the mean envelope from cubic Hermite
interpolation”® is subtracted. These effectively bandpass filtered quantities are used
for calculating the instantaneous wave Poynting vectors and energy densities. A
time-averaging method is performed also by using the mean envelope from
interpolation. The time-based methods used also allow uncertainties to be
estimated. This is done via a running root-mean-squared (RMS) deviation between
the raw and LOESS smoothed time-series, which are then propagated through the
subsequent methods used’”78,

To extract the MSE signal from the simulation, either in magnetopause location
or grid point data, we firstly neglect the initial large amplitude compression and
rebound. This is done by only using data from half an MSE period after the
magnetopause’s return to equilibrium, i.e. after the dotted line in Fig. 3a. For grid
point data, the timing at the magnetopause with the same X coordinate is used. The
secondary spectral peak is then suppressed using the same filtering procedure as for
the THEMIS data. The only differences are that standard (rather than robust)
LOESS is used due to reduced temporal resolution, and the window size used was
570 s corresponding to a 2.4 mHz cutoff.

Fourier and wavelet techniques. To compute time-averaged Poynting vectors as a

function of frequency a standard complex Fourier approach is used (Eq. (2) of
ref. 79)

_ Re(E(w)x B*(@))
(S(o)) 7 2Uo

This is done both in frequency—space using Welch’s method®? in computing onesided cross spectra, i.e. the products of electric and magnetic field components, and
in time-frequency space using products of analytic Morse continuous wavelet
transforms®*!. In both cases, a null hypothesis of autoregressive noise is assumed,
where the AR(1) parameters for each component of the electric and magnetic fields
are estimated using constrained maximum likelihood and 500 independent Monte
Carlo simulations are performed based on these models®*, with 95% confidence
intervals being constructed by taking percentiles (2.5 and 97.5%) of the resulting
time-averaged Poynting vectors.

(14)

Slowness. To quantify the propagation of MSE boundary perturbations, the
slowness was computed through cross-correlating the filtered magnetopause signals between adjacent local times. By interpolating the peak to find its corresponding time lag At, the azimuthal slowness is given by

At

sy = —

* [Ar

where |Ar| is the distance between the two points on the boundary used. Standard

errors in the correlation coefficient were also calculated and propagated through
the interpolation procedure to arrive at uncertainties.

(15)

Data availability

The THEMIS spacecraft data are available at http://themis.ssl.berkeley.edu/data/themis/
where level-2 data from the FGM, ESA and EFI instruments on each spacecraft has been
used in this study. The SWMF simulation data generated in this study are available in the
Community Coordinated Modeling Center (CCMC) at https://ccmc.gsfc.nasa.gov/
results/viewrun.php?domain=GM &runnumber=Michael_Hartinger_061418_1.

Code availability

The SWMEF and BATS-R-US (Block-Adaptive Tree Solarwind Roe-type Upwind Scheme)
software are available at https://github.com/MSTEM-QUDA. The SWMEF and BATS-RUS tools used are available at https://ccmce.gsfc.nasa.gov.

Received: 1 March 2021; Accepted: 30 August 2021;
Published online: 06 October 2021

NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25923-7

References

1.

10.

ll.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

2s

24.

25.

26.

ed

28.

Connor, J. W., Hastie, R. J., Wilson, H. R. & Miller, R. L.
Magnetohydrodynamic stability of tokamak edge plasmas. Phys. Plasmas 5,
2687 (1998).

He, F. et al. Plasmapause surface wave oscillates the magnetosphere and
diffuse aurora. Nat. Commun. 11, 1668 (2020).

Li, B., Habbal, S. R. & Chen, Y. The period ratio for standing kink and sausage
modes in solar structures with siphon flow. I. magnetized slabs. Astrophys. J.
767, 169 (2013).

Baranov, V. B., Fahr, H. J. & Ruderman, M. S. Investigation of macroscopic
instabilities a the heliopause boundary surface. Astron. Astrophys. 261,
341-347 (1992).

Stehle, R. & Spruit, H. C. Hydrodynamics of accretion discs of variable
thickness. Monthly Notices Royal Astron. Soc. 304, 674-686 (1999).

Zhao, J.-H., Burns, J. O., Hardee, P. E. & Normal, M. L. Instabilities in
astrophysical jets. I. linear analysis of body and surface waves. The
Astrophysical Journal 387, 69-82 (1992).

Summers, D., Mann, I. R., Baker, D. N. & Schulz, M. editors. in Dynamics of
the Earth’s Radiation Belts and Inner Magnetosphere. Vol. 199 of Geophysical
Monograph Series. (American Geophysical Union, 2013).

Elkington, S. R. A review of ULF interactions with radiation belt electrons. in
Magnetospheric ULF Waves: Synthesis and New Directions. Vol. 169 of
Geophysical Monograph Series (eds. Takahashi, K., Chi, P. J. Denton, R. E. &
Lysak, R. L.) 177-193 (John Wiley & Sons, 2006).

Keiling, A., Lee, D.-H. & Nakariakov, V. editors. Low-Frequency Waves in
Space Plasmas. Geophysical Monograph Series. (American Geophysical
Union, 2016).

Pu, Z.-Y. & Kivelson, M. G. Kelvin-Helmholtz Instability at the magnetopause:
solution for compressible plasmas. J. Geophys. Res. 88, 841-852 (1983).
Kivelson, M. G. & Chen, S.-H. in Physics of the Magnetopause. Geophysical
Monograph Series. (eds. Song, P., Sonnerup, B.U.O. & Thomsen, M.F.)
257-268 (American Geophysical Union, 1995).

Phillips, O. M. On the generation of waves by turbulent wind. J. Fluid
Mechanics 2, 417-445 (2006).

Miles, J. W. On the generation of surface waves by shear flows. J. Fluid
Mechanics 3, 185-204 (2006).

Samson, J. C., Jacobs, J. A. & Rostoker, G. Latitude-dependent characteristics
of long-period geomagnetic micropulsations. J. Geophys. Res. 76, 3675-3683
(1971).

Leonovich, A. S., Mazur, V. A. & Kozlov, D. A. in Low-Frequency Waves in
Space Plasmas. Geophysical Monograph Series. 161-179 (eds. Keiling, A., Lee,
D.-H. & Nakariakov, V.) (American Geophysical Union, 2016).

Plaschke, F. in Low-Frequency Waves in Space Plasmas. Geophysical
Monograph Series. (eds. Keiling, A., Lee, D.-H. & Nakariakov, V.) 193-212
(American Geophysical Union, 2016).

Hwang, K.-J. & Sibeck, D. G. in Low-Frequency Waves in Space Plasmas.
Geophysical Monograph Series. (eds. Keiling, A., Lee, D.-H. & Nakariakov, V.)
213-239 (American Geophysical Union, 2016).

Nykyri, K. & Otto, A. Plasma transport at the magnetospheric boundary due
to reconnection in Kelvin-Helmholtz vortices. Geophys. Res. Lett. 28,
3565-3568 (2001).

Ma, X., Otto, A. & Delamere, P. A. Interaction of magnetic reconnection and
Kelvin-Helmholtz modes for large magnetic shear: 1. Kelvin-Helmholtz
trigger. J. Geophys. Res. Space Phys. 119, 781-797 (2014).

Sibeck, D. G. A model for the transient magnetospheric response to sudden
solar wind dynamic pressure variations. J. Geophys. Res. 95, 3755-3771 (1990).
Zuo, P., Feng, X., Xie, Y.. Wang, Y. & Xu, X. A statistical survey of dynamic
pressure pulses in the solar wind based on WIND observations. Astrophys. J.
808, 83 (2015).

Villante, U., Di Matteo, S. & Piersanti, M. On the transmission of waves at
discrete frequencies from the solar wind to the magnetosphere and ground: a
case study. J. Geophys. Res. Space Phys. 121, 380-396 (2016).

Plaschke, F. et al. Jets downstream of collisionless shocks. Space Sci. Rev. 214,
81 (2018).

Constantinescu, O. D. et al. THEMIS observations of duskside compressional
Pc5 waves. J. Geophys. Res. 114, A00C25 (2009).

Nielsen, E. Observations of sunward propagating waves on the magnetopause.
J. Geophys. Res. 89, 9095-9099 (1984).

Eriksson, P. T. L, Blomberg, L. G., Schaefer, S. & Glassmeier, K.-H. Sunward
propagating Pc5 waves observed on the post-midnight magnetospheric flank.
Ann. Geophys. 26, 1567-1579 (2008).

Southwood, D. J. Some features of field line resonances in the magnetosphere.
Planet. Space Sci. 22, 483-491 (1974).

Kivelson., M. G., Etcheto, J. & Trotignon, J. G. Global compressional
oscillations of the terrestrial magnetosphere: the evidence and a model. J.
Geophys Res. 89, 9851-9856 (1984).

12 NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | (2021)12:5697 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25923-7 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25923-7 ARTICLE

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

35.

36.
37.

38.

39.

40.

Al.

42.

43,

44.

45.

46.

47.

48.

49.

50.

51.

Soe

53.

54,

Das

56.

Kivelson, M. G. & Southwood, D. J. Resonant ULF waves: a new
interpretation. Geophys. Res. Lett. 12, 49-52 (1985).

Chen, L. & Hasegawa, A. A theory of long-period magnetic pulsations: 2.
impulse excitation of surface eigenmode. J. Geophys. Res. 79, 1033-1037
(1974).

Plaschke, F. & Glassmeier, K. H. Properties of standing KruskalSchwarzschild-modes at the magnetopause. Ann. Geophys. 29, 1793-1807
(2011).

Hartinger, M. D. et al. The global structure and time evolution of dayside
magnetopause surface eigenmodes. Geophys. Res. Lett. 42, 2594-2602 (2015).
Archer, M. O. & Plaschke, F. What frequencies of standing surface waves can
the subsolar magnetopause support? J. Geophys. Res. 120, 3632-3646 (2015).
Kozyreva, O., Pilipenko, V., Lorentzen, D., Baddeley, L. & Hartinger, M.
Transient oscillations near the dayside open-closed boundary: Evidence of
magnetopause surface mode? J. Geophys. Res.: Space Phys. 124, 9058-9074
(2019).

Archer, M. O., Hietala, H., Hartinger, M. D., Plaschke, F. & Angelopoulos, V.
Direct observations of a surface eigenmode of the dayside magnetopause. Nat.
Commun. 10, 615 (2019).

Angelopoulos, V. The THEMIS mission. Space Sci. Rev. 141, 5-34 (2008).
Elsden, T. & Wright, A. N. The use of the Poynting vector in interpreting ULF
waves in magnetospheric waveguides. J. Geophys. Res. Space Phys. 120,
166-186 (2015).

Elsden, T. & Wright, A. N. The effect of fast normal mode structure and
magnetopause forcing on FLRs in a 3D waveguide. J. Geophys. Res. Space Phys.
123, 178-196 (2019).

Wright, A. N. & Elsden, T. Simulations of MHD wave propagation and
coupling in a 3-D magnetosphere. J. Geophys. Res. Space Phys. 125,
€2019JA027589 (2020).

Junginger, H. Poynting vector as a diagnostic of hydromagnetic wave
structure. J. Geophys. Res. 90, 4155-4163 (1985).

Sakurai, T. et al. Poynting vectors of Pc5 pulsations observed by the GEOTAIL
satellite in the dayside outer magnetosphere. Earth Planets Space 53, 843-849
(2001).

Southwood, D. J. & Kivelson, M. G. Relationships between phase structure and
energy flux in magnetohydrodynamic waves in the magnetosphere. J. Geophys.
Res. 105, 27701-27706 (2000).

Allan, W. Phase variation of ULF pulsations along the geomagnetic field-line.
Planetary Space Sci. 30, 339-346 (1982).

Ridley, A. J., Gombosi, T. I. & DeZeeuw, D. L. Ionospheric control of the
magnetosphere: conductance. Ann. Geophys. 22, 567-584 (2004).

Merkin, V. G., Lyon, J. G. & Claudepierre, S. G. Kelvin-Helmholtz instability
of the magnetospheric boundary in a three-dimensional global MHD
simulation during northward IMF conditions. J. Geophys. Res. Space Phys.
118, 5478-5496 (2013).

Gaiser, J. E. Transversely isotropic phase velocity analysis from slowness
estimates. J. Geophys. Res. 95, 11241-11254 (1990).

Degeling, A. W., Rankin, R. & Zong, Q.-G. Modeling radiation belt electron
acceleration by ULF fast mode waves, launched by solar wind dynamic
pressure fluctuations. J. Geophys. Res. Space Phys. 119, 8916-8928 (2014).
Mann, I. R., Wright, A. N., Mills, K. J. & Nakariakov, V. M. Excitation of
magnetospheric waveguide modes by magnetosheath flows. J. Geophys. Res.
104, 333-353 (1999).

Berchem, J. & Russell, C. T. The thickness of the magnetopause current layer:
ISEE 1 and 2 observations. J. Geophys. Res. 87, 2108-2114 (1982).

Samson, J. C., Harrold, B. G., Ruohoniemi, J. M., Greenwald, R. A. & Walker,
A. D. M. Field line resonances associated with MHD waveguides in the
magnetosphere. Geophys. Res. Lett. 19, 441-444 (1992).

Archer, M. O., Hartinger, M. D., Walsh, B. M., Plaschke, F. & Angelopoulos,
V. Frequency variability of standing Alfvén waves excited by fast mode
resonances in the outer magnetosphere. Geophys. Res. Lett. 42, 10150-10159
(2015).

Spreiter, J. R., Summers, A. L. & Alksne, A. Y. Hydromagnetic flow around the
magnetosphere. Planet. Space Sci. 14, 223-250 (1966).

Walsh, B. M., Sibeck, D. G., Wang, Y. & Fairfield, D. H. Dawn-dusk
asymmetries in the Earth’s magnetosheath. J. Geophys. Res. 117, A12211
(2012).

Urban, K. D., Gerrard, A. J., Lanzerotti, L. J. & Weatherwax, A. T. Rethinking
the polar cap: eccentric dipole structuring of ULF power at the highest
corrected geomagnetic latitudes. J. Geophys. Res. Space Physics 121, 8475-8507
(2016).

Di Matteo, S. & Villante, U. The identification of solar wind waves at discrete
frequencies and the role of the spectral analysis techniques. J. Geophys. Res.
Space Phys. 122, 4905-4920 (2017).

Di Matteo, S. & Villante, U. The identification of waves at discrete frequencies
at the geostationary orbit: The role of the data analysis techniques and the
comparison with solar wind observations. J. Geophys. Res. Space Phys. 123,
1953-1968 (2017).

57. Jacobs, J. A., Kato, Y., Matsushita, S. & Troitskaya, V. A. Classification of
geomagnetic micropulsations. J. Geophys. Res. 69, 180-181 (1964).

58. Pilipenko, V. A., Kozyreva, O. V., Baddeley, L., Lorentzen, D. A. &
Belakhovsky, V. B. Suppression of the dayside magnetopause surface modes.
Solar-Terrestrial Phys. 3, 17-25 (2017).

59. Pilipenko, V. A., Kozyreva, O. V., Lorentzen, D. A. & Baddeley, L. J. The
correspondence between dayside long-period geomagnetic pulsations and the
open-closed field line boundary. J. Atmos. Terr. Phys. 170, 64-74 (2018).

60. Sundberg, T. et al. MESSENGER orbital observations of large-amplitude
Kelvin-Helmholtz waves at Mercury’s magnetopause. J. Geophys. Res. 117,
A04216 (2012).

61. Delamere, P. A. in Low-Frequency Waves in Space Plasmas. Geophysical
Monograph Series. (eds. Keiling, A., Lee, D.-H. & Nakariakov, V.) 365-378
(American Geophysical Union, 2016).

62. Bagenal, F. in Planets, Stars and Stellar Systems. (eds. Oswalt, T.D., French,
L.M. & Kalas P.) 251-307 (Springer, 2013).

63. Yu, D. J. & Nakariakov, V. M. Excitation of negative energy surface
magnetohydrodynamic waves in an incompressible cylindrical plasma.
Astrophys. J.1 896, 21 (2020).

64. Foullon, C., Verwichte, E., Nykyri, K., Aschwanden, M. J. & Hannah, I. G.
Kelvin-Helmholtz instability of the CME reconnection outflow layer in the
low corona. Astrophys. J. 767, 170 (2013).

65. Walker, A. D. M. in Magnetohydrodynamic Waves in Geospace. Series in
Plasma Physics. (eds. Navas, J. & Laurenson, S.) 1-540 (Institute of Physics
Publishing, 2005).

66. Bers, A. Note on group velocity and energy propagation. Am. J. Phys. 68,
482-484 (2000).

67. Auster, H. U. et al. The THEMIS fluxgate magnetometer. Space Sci. Rev. 141,
235-264 (2008).

68. McFadden, J. P. et al. The THEMIS ESA plasma instrument and in-flight
calibration. Space Sci. Rev. 141, 277-302 (2008).

69. Bonnell, J. W. et al. The electric field instrument (EFI) for THEMIS. Space Sci.
Rev. 141, 303-341 (2008).

70. Huber, P. J. in Robust Statistics. Wiley Series in Probability 1-312 (John Wiley
& Sons, 1981).

71. Street, J. O., Carroll, R. J. & Ruppert, D. A note on computing robust
regression estimates via iteratively reweighted least squares. Am. Stat. 42,
152-154 (1988).

72. Toth, G. et al. Space weather modeling framework: a new tool for the space
science community. J. Geophys. Res.: Space Phys. 110, A12226 (2005).

73. Toth, G. et al. Adaptive numerical algorithms in space weather modeling. J.
Comput. Phys. 231, 870-903 (2012). Special Issue: Computational Plasma Physics.

74. Webber, J. B. W. A bi-symmetric log transformation for wide-range data.
Meas. Sci. Technol. 24, 027001 (2012).

75. Cleveland, W. S. Robust locally weighted regression and smoothing
scatterplots. J. Am. Stat. Assoc. 74, 829-836 (1979).

76. Fritsch, F. N. & Carlson, R. E. Monotone piecewise cubic interpolation. SIAM
J. Numer. Anal. 17, 238-246 (1980).

77. Horst, Z. Properties of digital smoothing polynomial (dispo) filters. Appl.
Spectroscopy 35, 88-92 (1981).

78. White, D. R. Propagation of uncertainty and comparison of interpolation
schemes. Inte. J. Thermophys. 38, 39 (2017).

79. Hartinger, M. D., Moldwin, M. B., Takahashi, K., Bonnell, J. W. &
Angelopoulos, V. Survey of the ULF wave Poynting vector near the earth’s
magnetic equatorial plane. J. Geophys. Res. Space Phys. 118, 6212-6227 (2013).

80. Welch, P. D. The use of fast Fourier transform for the estimation of power
spectra: a method based on time averaging over short, modified periodograms.
IEEE Trans. Audio Electroacoust 15, 70-73 (1967).

81. Lilly, J. M. & Olhede, S. C. Generalized Morse wavelets as a superfamily of
analytic wavelets. IEEE Trans. Signal Process. 60, 6036-6041 (2012).

82. Box, G. E. P., Jenkins, G. M., Reinsel, G. C. & Ljung, G. M. in Time Series
Analysis: Forecasting and Control. 3rd edition, (John Wiley & Sons, 1994).

Acknowledgements

M.O.A. holds a UKRI (STFC/EPSRC) Stephen Hawking Fellowship EP/T01735X/1.
M.D.H. was supported by NASA grant 80NSSC19K0127. F.P. was supported by the
Austrian Science Fund (FWF): P 33285-N. D.J.S. was supported by STFC grant ST/
S000364/1. We acknowledge NASA contract NAS5-02099 for use of data from the
THEMIS Mission. Specifically K.H. Glassmeier, U. Auster and W. Baumjohann for the
use of FGM data provided under the lead of the Technical University of Braunschweig
and with financial support through the German Ministry for Economy and Technology
and the German Center for Aviation and Space (DLR) under contract 50 OC 0302; C.W.
Carlson and J.P. McFadden for use of ESA data; and J.W. Bonnell and F.S. Mozer for EFI
data. Simulation results have been provided by the Community Coordinated Modeling
Center (CCMC) at Goddard Space Flight Center using the SWMF and BATS-R-US tools
developed at the University of Michigan’s Center for Space Environment Modeling
(CSEM).

NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | (2021)12:5697 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25923-7 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications 13
ARTICLE

Author contributions

M.O.A. and M.D.H. conceived the study. L.R. gave technical support. M.O.A. performed
the analysis of the data. M.O.A., M.D.H., F.P. and DJ.S. interpreted the results. M.O.A.
wrote the paper, with M.D.H., F.P. and D.J.S. assisting.

Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

Additional information
Supplementary information The online version contains supplementary material
available at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25923-7.

Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to M. O. Archer.

Peer review information Nature Communications thanks the anonymous reviewers for
their contribution to the peer review of this work. Peer reviewer reports are available.

Reprints and permission information is available at http://www.nature.com/reprints

NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25923-7

Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional affiliations.

Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
BY

Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party
material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from
the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/.

© The Author(s) 2021

14 NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | (2021)12:5697 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25923-7 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
